
= ActiveProfiling

ActiveProfiling is a gem I've slapped together over the years to help with
profiling Rails applications.

== Profiler ActionController Filters

=== +action_profiler+

This filter wraps up the functionality of RubyProf for each action and can be
used to spit out the results to +stdout+, your log file or to files in the
+Rails.root/log/profiling+ directory.

Options and their defaults for +action_profiler+ are listed in
ActiveProfiling::Railtie::DEFAULT_PROFILER_OPTIONS, but the gist of it is that
you can basically use any of RubyProf's various options and control where the
output is directed. For some the +:call_tree+ output type, results are written
to individual files in +Rails.root/log/profiling+, while for all other output
types the results are written to the Rails log. You can of course redirect
all logging to files if you prefer, or to the standard output.

To enable this filter, add the following to your application configuration:

  config.active_profiling.profiler.enabled = true

Additional configuration options can be found in the documentation for
ActiveProfiling::Railtie.

=== +action_gc_statistics+

This filter wraps up the functionality of either GC::Profiler in Ruby 1.9+ or
the GC statistics patches available for 1.8.7 if installed, either through
Ruby Enterprise Edition or by patching your own Ruby. When enabled, information
on the Ruby garbage collector will be written to the Rails log at the end of
each action response. Options for controlling how the information is collected
and logged can be found in ActiveProfiling::Railtie::DEFAULT_GC_STATISTICS_OPTIONS.

Note that the output for Ruby 1.9+ is a bit different from REE or a patched
Ruby due to the manner in which they collect and report on GC statistics. In
the REE patches you can access a number of options that aren't currently
available in GC::Profiler. I've tried to make some sensible output for REE,
but there are going to be differences based solely on the manner in which the
statistics are collected.

To enable this filter, add the following to your application configuration:

  config.active_profiling.gc_statistics.enabled = true

Additional configuration options can be found in the documentation for
ActiveProfiling::Railtie.

== Profiling Blocks

You can also profile individual blocks of code by using the
ActiveProfiling.ruby_profiler and ActiveProfiling.gc_statistics methods or
by including the ActiveProfiling::RubyProfiler or ActiveProfiling::GCStatistics
modules and using the methods in your own classes and modules. In both cases,
these methods take the same options as found in the ActionController filters
minus the +:enabled+ option.

  # Will spit out the GC statistics if GC is run, same as with the action
  # filter.
  ActiveProfiling.gc_statistics do
    # ...
  end

  # Wraps the block in a RubyProf session and logs the results accordingly.
  ActiveProfiling.ruby_profiler(options) do
    # ...
  end


== Extended ActiveRecord Logging

The database can often be a performance hotspot, and tracking down where and
why some queries are occuring in your application can be a pain.
ActiveProfiling includes an extended query logger that can be configured
to log backtraces for SQL queries that can help you track down where
unexpected queries are occuring in your code.

To enable extended logging, add the following to your application
configuration:

  config.active_profiling.active_record.backtrace_logger.enabled = true

Additional configuration options can be found in the documentation for
ActiveProfiling::Railtie.

== Using In A Rails Project

Profiling should be performed in a production environment, as profiling in
development really isn't reflective of how your application is actually going
to be running in the Real World. At the same time, you don't necessarily want
to clutter up your application settings and +Gemfile+ with unnecessary code
and have to worry about accidentally committing profiling settings to your
source code repository and the like.

A semi-neat trick to try is to set up a file for local application settings
thusly:

First, add the following to your +application.rb+. You generally want this near
the end of the file.

  if File.exists?("#{Rails.root}/config/application_local.rb")
    require "#{Rails.root}/config/application_local.rb"
  end

Add an entry for +application_local.rb+ to your +.gitignore+ file or otherwise
ignore it with your SCM.

In +application_local.rb+, you can set up additional application settings
like so:

  # You can now flip this line on and off to enable or disable
  # ActiveProfiling.
  Bundler.require(:profiling, Rails.env) if defined?(Bundler)

  module FooBarApp
    class Application < Rails::Application
      # config.log_level = :debug

      if defined?(ActiveProfiling)
        config.active_profiling.profiler.enabled = false
        config.active_profiling.profiler.output = :file
        config.active_profiling.profiler.printer = :graph_html
        config.active_profiling.profiler.printer_options = {
          :min_percent => 1,
          :print_file => true
        }
        config.active_profiling.gc_statistics.enabled = true

        config.active_profiling.active_record.backtrace_logger.enabled = true
      end

      # etc...
    end
  end

This allows you to tweak some settings without affecting your main
+application.rb+ file.

You'll also want to add the following to your +Gemfile+:

  group :profiling do
    gem 'active-profiling'
    gem 'ruby-prof'
  end

== License

This gem is licensed under an MIT-style license. See the +MIT-LICENSE+ file for
details.
